---
layout: post
title:  "Tracers"
date:   2020-10-11 09:25:49 +0200
categories: ["Philosophy"]
excerpt: "A mental model for exploring connectivity in networks."
---
In middle school biology, our teacher ran a simple, yet intriguing, experiment. She placed a plant in a bottle filled with water, and added a few drops of a powerful blue pigment. For the next couple of minutes, the pigment gracefully spread through the liquid, like a well-coordinated dance performance involving countless suspended particles. To our fascination, as the time went by, the plant got a stronger and stronger tint of blue. Its pathways for transporting water and nutrients became particularly colorful. Essentially, the pigment joined the ride, sneaking through the water. The hidden structure of the network embedded in the plant had been laid bare in front of a couple dozen pairs of curious eyes.

I came across a very similar pattern in an introductory course on cognitive neuroscience. PET, or positron emission tomography, is a neuroimaging technique designed to uncover the ways in which signals propagate in the brain. In order to conduct a PET scan, researchers first inject a (harmless) radioactive drug in the brain, refered to as a tracer. Good luck finding participants who consent to that, by the way. Next, participants are asked to conduct certain mental tasks, such as solving algebra problems. Finally, researchers take a look at the spread of the tracer and analyze the way in which it propagated across neurons. Essentially, the tracer gets interwoven into the neural network and renders it visible for the researchers.

At the end of 2019, the first people tested positive for a new virus strain in China. In the following months, more and more countries reported infections. Unsurprisingly, the next few countries to do so were ones that had strong geopolitical or sociocultural interactions with China: South Korea, Taiwan, and Hong Kong. As the ensuing pandemic unfolded, the number of cases throughout the globe was strongly influenced by the paths of international relations. The virus travelled side by side with commuting citizens. The hidden geopolitical, sociocultural, and economic network embedded in the international community had been revealed.

In early 2017, the WannaCry ransomware started infecting its first targets. Computers across the globe were affected by the ruthless attack on user data, demanding hefty ransoms for their decryption. However, the piece of malware spread by exploiting a vulnerability in a network protocol and propagating across networked computers. Therefore, the reports on attacks throughout the globe echoed an underlying pattern of network connectivity.

One final example. Rumours spread like wildfire, and the otherwise inaccessible structures beneath social circles can be rendered visible by observing their propagation. By assuming that the speed of rumour transmission between two individuals is a proxy for how socially connected they are, one could roughly model social structure based solely on the rumour spread. People who are outside the loop will have a hard time picking up on it, which is only natural as they are not that strongly connected to the others.

The pattern can be described as following. A tracer is introduced in a network, and its spread can be easily detected. This can be used as a general tool to expose the connectivity structure of a previously invisible network. With applications in biology, neurology, informatics, and sociology, it seems to be a widely applicable pattern. That's it.