---
layout: post
age: 20.79
title: breaking frames
published: False
---

## breaking frames

As knowledge workers, we often find ourselves in need of fresh perspectives. A developer might think of better ways of implementing a feature. An architect might think of better ways of designing a building. A researcher might think of better ways of designing an experiment. Searching for new perspectives is part of our work, yet we often struggle to break out of our mental frames, to break away from the thought patterns we're most fluent in. It's difficult to think in new ways if all you have is your own thinking.

Fortunately, we have many external sources of thought at our disposal. The most accessible one consists of other people. By interacting with others, you get to think thoughts you wouldn't otherwise, thoughts that lie outside your current frame. This might be enough to cause a shift in your thinking, but there are important limitations to this approach. First, others have their own frames. When interacting with others, you're simply distancing yourself from your previous patterns by getting closer to those of others -- it's interpolative. Therefore, choosing your influences strategically is crucial. Interacting with someone who closely shares your thinking would only solidify your current perspective further.

Second, people are a limited resource. Not only in terms of time, but also in terms of thought. There are only so many people, each with their own point of view. Artifacts like books and artworks do expand your reach to perspectives from the past, but even those are finite, momentary snapshots. The set of all thoughts humans had is but a fraction of the vast space of possible thoughts. To make matters worse, the subset of all human thoughts you can feasibly tap into (e.g. by reading a novel) is even more limited.

Another source of thought we have at our disposal is thoughtware -- inanimate tools for thought of various levels of sophistication. The simplicity of many of those tools stands to show just how impactful even slight divergences can be. For instance, many thoughtware engineers marvel at how effective randomness can be in helping us break frames. [Sample a random idea](https://youtu.be/Oxbv9EnhSuk?t=1161) using your favorite knowledge management app, and you'll be surprised how liberating it feels to make connections you wouldn't have thought of otherwise. [Sample a random prompt](https://psionica.org/tools/k-probes/) when reflecting on a topic and you'll be surprised by the insights you'll end up gaining. Heck, [sample a random Tarot card](https://busterbenson.com/tarot/) and you'll be surprised by your velocity across thought space for a few solid seconds. You don't even need digital tools to leverage randomness. Get yourself a dice, check the seconds on your watch, or just shuffle your deck of cards.

If even a mechanic as simple as randomness feels so effective in breaking frames, then there's likely a huge space of opportunities for improvement in thoughtware. A promising direction for developing more powerful tools for breaking frames is to encode models of our frames in them. It's easier to break a frame if you know what to break, what exactly to diverge from. One mechanic which relies on such a cognitive model is the antimemory of the conceptarium. By maintaining a model of what you're thinking about through document activations, the conceptarium can specifically surface ideas which you wouldn't think of yourself. It can explicitly run _against_ your frame, expand your awareness in ways you wouldn't expect.

Interestingly enough, there's a continuum between people and thoughtware as sources of thought. Many tools simply navigate human thought in non-human ways. Randomness and antimemory are both examples of this. However, more sophisticated thoughtware, like modern virtual assistants, are tools which emulate actual human thought. The recent wave of language models trained on large text corpora distil human thought into representations which can be subjected to radically non-human manipulations.

There are even more radical ways of breaking frames out there. You might [expose yourself to challenging experiences](https://depthnotwidth.com/the-misogi-challenge-taking-risks-and-crushing-your-comfort-zone/) in an effort to expand your perception of what's possible. You might meddle with the biochemistry of your brain by [inducing hypnagogia](https://www.healthline.com/health/hypnagogia#inducing-hypnagogia), experimenting with psychedelics, or practicing lucid dreaming. That said, I find thoughtware to be the single most exciting source of exotic thought out there. It enables us to explore a vast space of non-human thought in a scalable, formalizable, and elegant way, and I can't wait to see what's out there.
